docs: add ADR 055 ORM (#11807)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-055-orm.md

when storing primary key records. For example, if the object `{"a":0,"b":1}` has the primary key `a`, it will
be stored in the key value store as `Key: '0', Value: {"b":1}` (with more efficient protobuf binary encoding).
Also, the generated code from https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-proto does optimizations around the
`google.golang.org/protobuf/reflect/protoreflect` API to improve performance.

A code generator is included with the ORM which creates type safe wrappers around the ORM's dynamic `Table`
implementation and is the recommended way for modules to use the ORM.

## Consequences

### Backwards Compatibility

State machine code that adopts the ORM will need migrations as the state layout is generally backwards incompatible.
These state machines will also need to migrate to https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-proto at least for state data.

### Positive

* easier to build modules
* easier to add secondary indexes to state
* possible to write a generic indexer for ORM state
* easier to write clients that do state proofs
* possible to automatically write query layers rather than needing to manually implement gRPC queries

### Negative

> * worse performance than hand-generated keys (for now)

Reviewer: should we mention a sentence or two on how we will increase it?

Author: updated

# ADR 055: ORM

## Changelog

* 2022-04-27: First draft

## Status

ACCEPTED Implemented

## Abstract

> In order to make it easier for developers to build state machines and for clients to query, index and verify proofs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to make it easier for developers to build Cosmos SDK Apps and for clients to query, index and verify proofs
```

against state data, we have implemented an ORM (object-relational mapping) layer for the Cosmos SDK.

## Context

Historically modules in the Cosmos SDK have always used the key-value store directly and created various handwritten
functions for managing key format as well as constructing secondary indexes. This consumes a significant amount of
time when building a module and is error-prone. Because key formats are non-standard, sometimes poorly documented,
and subject to change, it is hard for clients to generically index, query and verify merkle proofs against state data.

The known first instance of an "ORM" in the Cosmos ecosystem was in [weave](https://github.com/iov-one/weave/tree/master/orm).

> A later version was built for [regen-ledger](https://github.com/regen-network/regen-ledger/tree/master/orm) for

Reviewer 3: probably best to use commit hashes instead of `master` within the links of this paragraph, in case this gets removed/outdated

use in the group module and later [ported to the SDK](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/tree/main/x/group/internal/orm)
just for that purpose.

While these earlier designs made it significantly easier to write state machines, they still required a lot of manual
configuration, didn't expose state format directly to clients, and were limited in their support of different types
of index keys, composite keys, and range queries.

Discussions about the design continued in https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/discussions/9156 and more
sophisticated proofs of concept were created in https://github.com/allinbits/cosmos-sdk-poc/tree/master/runtime/orm
and https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/10454.

## Decision

These prior efforts culminated in the creation of the Cosmos SDK `orm` go module which uses protobuf annotations
for specifying ORM table definitions. This ORM is based on the new `google.golang.org/protobuf/reflect/protoreflect`
API and supports:

> * sorted indexes for all simple protobuf types (except `bytes`, `enum`, `float`, `double`) as well as `Timestamp` and `Duration`

Reviewer 2: why we don't support sorted bytes index?

Reviewer 4: The existing sorting over strings covers all use cases I'd have in mind

Reviewer 2: If we store address as bytes then it will be useful.

Author: But what does sorting get us with addresses? They're not intrinsically ordered

* unsorted `bytes` and `enum` indexes
* composite primary and secondary keys
* unique indexes
* auto-incrementing `uint64` primary keys
* complex prefix and range queries
* paginated queries
* complete logical decoding of KV-store data

> Almost all the information needed to decode state directly is specified in .proto files. Each table definition specifies

Author: what's listed later in that paragraph: 
> Clients then only need
to know the name of a module and the prefix ORM data for a specific .proto file within that module in order to decode
state data directly. This additional information will be exposed directly through app configs which will be explained
in a future ADR related to app wiring.

an ID which is unique per .proto file and each index within a table is unique within that table. Clients then only need
to know the name of a module and the prefix ORM data for a specific .proto file within that module in order to decode
state data directly. This additional information will be exposed directly through app configs which will be explained
in a future ADR related to app wiring.

The ORM makes optimizations around storage space by not repeating values in the primary key in the key value
when storing primary key records. For example, if the object `{"a":0,"b":1}` has the primary key `a`, it will
be stored in the key value store as `Key: '0', Value: {"b":1}` (with more efficient protobuf binary encoding).
Also, the generated code from https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-proto does optimizations around the
`google.golang.org/protobuf/reflect/protoreflect` API to improve performance.

A code generator is included with the ORM which creates type safe wrappers around the ORM's dynamic `Table`

> implementation and is the recommended way for modules to use the ORM.

Reviewer 5: I personally think a subsection with an example would be useful to show how the ORM concretely looks like for modules:
- the proto options for a table
- generated code (at least the generated methods signatures)
- how it's used in a keeper

Probably links to the test bank ORM table would suffice

## Consequences

### Backwards Compatibility

State machine code that adopts the ORM will need migrations as the state layout is generally backwards incompatible.
These state machines will also need to migrate to https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-proto at least for state data.

### Positive

* easier to build modules
* easier to add secondary indexes to state
* possible to write a generic indexer for ORM state
* easier to write clients that do state proofs

> * possible to automatically write query layers rather than needing to manually implement gRPC queries

Reviewer 2: + it's optional and can be used with existing storage management mechanism (projects can update in iterations).

### Negative

* worse performance than handwritten keys (for now). See [Further Discussions](#further-discussions)
for potential improvements

### Neutral

## Further Discussions

Further discussions will happen within the Cosmos SDK Framework Working Group. Current planned and ongoing work includes:

> * automatically generate client-facing query layer

Reviewer 4: I imagine in a much distant future, we'll do things with the merkelization layer to get some of the efficiently iterable queries also easy to light client prove
